# UMCCR website

IMPORTANT: Clone this repo with `--recursive`, otherwise the themes will not be pulled and the builds will fail.

```bash
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/umccr-svc/site
```
## Add Author

Existing authors can be viewed via `/authors`.  
`https://umccr.org/authors`

### Via CMS (online tool)

Through the CMS click on the add author on the left pane of the website.  
Fill in your details on the web.  

Your `Display Name` field will be use for your username. The username is defined by replacing the spaces to dash and convert it to lower case.

For example:  
`John Doe` have the username of `john-doe`.

### Via Local Deployment

If you do not have an author profile under `/content/authors`, you can create one by using the following command.  
```bash
$ hugo new --kind authors authors/firstname-lastname
```  
Update values generated by the template under your name in the authors directoy. Keep the authors value exactly the same with the name of your folder.


## Where to place my content

### Via CMS

Blog is stored under post section.  
Add new posts by clicking on the the `New Posts` button.

Tips:
- When filling tags, categories, authors (field that could take an array of string). Use comma and space to make the input as array of strings.
- Authors field will need the author username instead your name. So refer to add author section above for more info.


### Via Local Deployment

Blog content is stored at `/content/blog/`.  

Create a new folder with the name of the content and save your markdown file as `index.md`.  
Include images referencing from the folder itself.  

To include your name at the blog, at the authors section on the top of the file put your author's username instead of your name.

In order to view your changes locally (before pushing it live), just use:

```bash
$ ./view.sh
```

Unless you are using RStudio+blogdown Addin already. Then just git push and the changes should be visible at:

https://umccr.org/

If you cannot see your changes, please check that there are no deployment errors either locally or at netlify.com Deploy interface.
