content/blog/2019-08-02-amazon-igv-backend.md, before:

---
title: Amazon IGV backend setup 
author: Andrew Patterson and Roman Valls Guimera
date: "2019-08-02"
slug: igv-amazon-backend-setup
layout: post
permalink: https://umccr.org/blog/2019/08/02/igv-amazon-backend-setup
categories:
 - bioinformatics 
 - infrastructure
tags:
 - bioinformatics
 - igv
summary: "Setting up a secure Amazon Cognito and S3 backend for IGV desktop"
---

# Context and state of the art

This is our first guest blogpost graciously contributed by [Andrew Patterson](https://github.com/andrewpatto) from [Melbourne Genomics](http://melbournegenomics.org.au/) who is [deploying this IGV solution in Melbourne to medical scientists](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620#issuecomment-510362122).

~~Before we dive in, it is important to note that until [@igvteam](https://github.com/igvteam/) merges in [pullrequest #620](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620), the functionality we describe here **works only with AWS UMCCR IGV temporary fork**, freely available [here](https://github.com/umccr/igv/releases).~~

~~Your regular IGV installation does not have this functionality included, yet. [We are actively working with Jim Robinson and his team at the Broad Institute to get it merged into IGV proper](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620).~~

**AMAZON CHANGES MERGED UPSTREAM on 2019-09-11 !!!**

Therefore, **IGV versions >= 2.7.0 incorporate the AWS functionality outlined below.**

# AWS backend deployment step by step

IGV desktop has had a feature added [as described on an earlier UMCCR's blogpost about IGV](https://umccr.org/blog/igv-amazon/) to support to use of BAMs in S3 storage by using native AWS authorization and authentication to access the bioinformatics data.


This means that S3 URIs such as:

```
s3://my-bucket/NA12878.bam
```

can be opened directly by using an OAuth user AuthN/AuthZ to establish permissions to access files.

In this short document we will go through all the steps to setup an AWS account allowing this login - and the corresponding configuration settings needed for IGV.

Don't worry about the fact the screenshot details are exposed in this guide - after the demo was made these settings have all
been deleted! You will see red text throughout the screenshots to indicate pertinent settings. These will all be explained at
the end of these instructions - they will be a handy reference for where these settings are needed when constructing the IGV
configuration file.


## User Pool

### OAuth

Building on techniques already in use in IGV for accessing Google resources - the IGV S3 feature uses OAuth to obtain
credentials that can be used for loading and browsing S3 buckets. Specifically in this example we will use
[AWS Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/) to be both the OAuth endpoint *and* the database of registered users.

**Cognito (and OAuth) allows many other combinations - including enabling social logins (Google, Facebook), or 3rd party OAuth aggregators (Auth0 etc)**. We will not deal with these configuration in this guide however, although UMCCR does use user federation and it is a recommended best practice to manage user credentials and access.

### A source of users

An authenticated login obviously needs some concept of a 'user' (with associated details such as email, name and password).
Within AWS Cognito - this user source is called a User Pool.

We go to our AWS Console / Cognito and 'Create a User Pool'. In our demonstration we call this pool 'IGV User Pool' and
we accept all the default configuration settings - as we will be stepping through changing them after creation.

![user pool created](/img/2019/08/user_pool_created.png)

We then go to 'Users and groups' and create our demonstration user 'igvuser' (with whatever details are appropriate - AWS is
a bit finnicky about the format of the phone number and has a reasonably strict default password policy).

![create user in user pool](/img/2019/08/create_user.png)


### General settings / App clients

OAuth clients (which is what IGV will be behaving as) must be explicitly added into a user
 pool in order to enable logins by users in the pool. Here we go to
'App clients' and create a new client - accepting the default settings and giving it a unique app client name
 of 'igv demo client'.

![application client create](/img/2019/08/app_clients_create.png)

Immediately after creation, an 'App client secret' has been made for us. These settings are needed for
 the IGV configuration so we show this screenshot purely for those purposes. No actual changes need to be made
 to the app client here.

![application client edit](/img/2019/08/app_clients_edit.png)


### App integration / App client settings

Once the app client is created - we need to complete the User Pool by putting some custom settings into the app client related
to how IGV is going to call it. We also need to create a domain that IGV will use for finding the OAuth endpoints.

When we first come into the app client settings - the app client we have just created is effectively disabled. We need to enable the
client ('Select all'), specify the callback URL that is going to be used by IGV (this is a localhost URL that defines
where IGV on your desktop listens for information coming back to it - and must be `http://localhost:60151/oauthCallback` for
a standard IGV desktop setup), and switch on OAuth 2.0.

The final settings for our client are shown below.

![settings app client](/img/2019/08/settings_app_client.png)

### App integration and Cognito domain name

We need to create a domain to define the URLs that IGV will visit to initiate actions. The domain must be globally unique, so come up with
a relevant name for your purposes. Note that unlike most settings we are hilighting in these screenshots - these go into
our config files with some suffixes (i.e they do not copy directly).

![cognito igv domain](/img/2019/08/domain.png)

### Other

There are many other settings for Cognito user pools - dealing with how logins look and feels, password complexity
rules, MFA etc. We will not go into them in these instructions - but these should all be evaluated in any production scenario.

## Identity Pool

We have now set up a user pool - a source of users - but there is no mapping yet between these users and a set of AWS credentials that
will be needed to access the AWS S3 files. To establish this mapping - we need to set up a AWS Cognito Identity Pool.

Before starting - we need two settings from our User Pool - so go to the settings of our previously created
User Pool and write down the following values.

The app client id is a random string created during our User Pool setup. It will look something 
like `3f4ujenfmr77tg12iofbebpkoh` and will be labelled 'App client id'.

The pool id is a shorter random string created when we first made the User Pool. It will look something
like `ap-southeast-2_IYMvlZzmv` and will be labelled 'Pool Id'.

We then create an identity pool, entering in the settings from above and a unique identity pool name.

![identity pool created](/img/2019/08/identity_pool_created.png)

The next page will then allow use to create AWS user roles associated with the Identity Pool. The 'authenticated' 
identity role is the only one of interest to us - and it is fine to accept the defaults. We will add to these
defaults later to give the role the ability to access S3.

Finally for the Identity Pool - we need to find the newly created Identity Pool ID. This is shown in multiple
spots in the AWS Console UI - but can be seen easily when we go to 'Edit Identity Pool'.

![identity pool edited](/img/2019/08/identity_pool_edit.png)


## Roles and policies

The whole point of this exercise is to load a BAM from S3 - so let's make a bucket with a BAM and create the
permissions necessary for us to access it.

The first step we will need to do is to give the IAM role in our account enough permissions to access S3. The
default IAM role as created automatically by Cognito has a very restricted set of rights. Here we have gone
to the role (look for the one called \*Auth\_Role) and added a \*read only\* custom policy that fits our needs:

![auth policy](/img/2019/08/auth_policy.png)

For instance, one could use the following custom policy attached to the authenticated role:

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "IGVCognitoAuthedUsersProd",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:ListBucket",
                "s3:GetObject"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::igv-demo-bucket",
                "arn:aws:s3:::igv-demo-bucket/*",
            ]
        },
        {
            "Sid": "IGVListBuckets",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:ListAllMyBuckets"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::*"
            ]
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "mobileanalytics:PutEvents",
                "cognito-sync:*",
                "cognito-identity:*"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

[Those permissions could be further tightened if there are concerns about other users listing objects that they do not own.](https://github.com/awsdocs/iam-user-guide/issues/107)

**Please make sure that the *Unauth_Role has no policies attached (implicitly denying all actions by unauthenticated users), otherwise those users may access some of your resources on AWS**. The following screenshot shows the expected result:

![unauth policy](/img/2019/08/unauth_policy.png)

The reason for this emphasis is that there have been security incidents with misconfigured Cognito installations:

{{<tweet 1124026439366586368>}}

So it's worth to pay attention to it and be safer than sorry.

## S3

Now all we need is a bucket with a BAM - so find a BAM (and index file) from somewhere and upload them into
a bucket.

![s3 contents](/img/2019/08/s3.png)

Note: there are no special permissions on this bucket - it is a private bucket just in the same account as our
Cognito - thereby showing that private BAM files can be accessed. Obviously the S3 permissions model allows
use much more flexible scenarios, including cross account bucket sharing.

## IGV's oauth-config.json file

Finally we need to bring all these settings together in IGV to allow
it to trigger the authentication process. Locate (or create) a file
called ```oauth-config.json``` in your igv directory. On a Mac - the igv directory
is automatically created in your home directory when IGV runs - and is used to
store preferences and reference genome files etc. The config file you
are editing is all the instructions to allow it to connect to Cognito.

```json
{
   "apiKey": "",
   "project_id": "igv",

   "auth_provider": "Amazon",
   "auth_provider_x509_cert_url": "https://www.googleapis.com/oauth2/v1/certs",
   "aws_region": "ap-southeast-2",
   "scope": "email%20openid%20profile",
   "redirect_uris": [
     "http://localhost:60151/oauthCallback"
   ],

   "client_id": "3f4ujenfmr77tg12iofbebpkoh",
   "client_secret": "en1q6638m4dogrr6erhosetim67sjilc6htjnfmf6ljk2q3j9og",
   "authorization_endpoint": "https://igv-demo.auth.ap-southeast-2.amazoncognito.com/login",
   "token_endpoint": "https://igv-demo.auth.ap-southeast-2.amazoncognito.com/token",
   "aws_cognito_fed_pool_id": "ap-southeast-2:15b7bf93-18ca-40d5-99e9-38b4eb69363e",
   "aws_cognito_pool_id": "ap-southeast-2_IYMvlZzmv",
   "aws_cognito_role_arn": "arn:aws:iam::YOUR_AWS_ACCOUNT:role/YOUR_Cognito_igvAuth_Role"
}
```

Of the above settings, some are seemingly arbitrary (unused?) values. This includes
* ```apiKey``` 
* ```project_id```.

Other settings are fixed for the scenario we have (a full Cognito solution in ap-southeast-2). These include
* ```auth_provider```
* ```auth_provider_x509_cert_url```
* ```aws_region``` 
* ```scope``` 
* ```redirect_uris``` (is a fixed value unless
 someone has changed the listening port inside IGV)
 
 All the other settings in the config **must be set to values that are unique to your particular installation (there is no point copying the values directly from the example JSON!)**. These values come directly from various stages in our User Pool and Identity Pool creation. To help
 match where the values come from - you can go back through the above screen shots - and look for red text
 ```(key)``` to show where directly in the AWS Console the values have come from.
 

## IGV is ready to see data from AWS S3

 Once these settings are made - run IGV on your desktop and go to the menus Amazon / Login.
 
 A browser page should open up asking you for the username and password you created earlier. On the first login - it may also prompt you to change your password.
 
 The menu **Amazon->Load From S3 will present a listing of objects that you can load, in case you want to load more than one track at once.**
 
 **Furthermore, File->Session Save and sharing the resulting .xml session file, allows to securely share the context of tracks loaded, including zoom levels and regions of interest to collaborators**.
 
 Alternatively, if you know the path of the file on S3, once logged in, go to File / Load from URL. Enter the S3 path to the BAM you have uploaded as shown below.

![igv load url](/img/2019/08/igv_load.png)
 
If all has gone well you should be able to see the BAM content as if the file was
sitting locally on your computer.

![igv bam loaded](/img/2019/08/igv_loaded.png)

Commit message:

Add new provisioning URL dialog on the documentation, no more copying oauth-config.json around, serving it from a stable url instead /cc @reisingerf @andrewpatto

content/blog/2019-08-02-amazon-igv-backend.md, after:

---
title: Amazon IGV backend setup 
author: Andrew Patterson and Roman Valls Guimera
date: "2019-08-02"
slug: igv-amazon-backend-setup
layout: post
permalink: https://umccr.org/blog/2019/08/02/igv-amazon-backend-setup
categories:
 - bioinformatics 
 - infrastructure
tags:
 - bioinformatics
 - igv
summary: "Setting up a secure Amazon Cognito and S3 backend for IGV desktop"
---

# Context and state of the art

This is our first guest blogpost graciously contributed by [Andrew Patterson](https://github.com/andrewpatto) from [Melbourne Genomics](http://melbournegenomics.org.au/) who is [deploying this IGV solution in Melbourne to medical scientists](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620#issuecomment-510362122).

~~Before we dive in, it is important to note that until [@igvteam](https://github.com/igvteam/) merges in [pullrequest #620](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620), the functionality we describe here **works only with AWS UMCCR IGV temporary fork**, freely available [here](https://github.com/umccr/igv/releases).~~

~~Your regular IGV installation does not have this functionality included, yet. [We are actively working with Jim Robinson and his team at the Broad Institute to get it merged into IGV proper](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/pull/620).~~

**AMAZON CHANGES MERGED UPSTREAM on 2019-09-11 !!!**

Therefore, **IGV versions >= 2.7.1 incorporate the AWS functionality outlined below.**

# AWS backend deployment step by step

IGV desktop has had a feature added [as described on an earlier UMCCR's blogpost about IGV](https://umccr.org/blog/igv-amazon/) to support to use of BAMs in S3 storage by using native AWS authorization and authentication to access the bioinformatics data.


This means that S3 URIs such as:

```
s3://my-bucket/NA12878.bam
```

can be opened directly by using an OAuth user AuthN/AuthZ to establish permissions to access files.

In this short document we will go through all the steps to setup an AWS account allowing this login - and the corresponding configuration settings needed for IGV.

Don't worry about the fact the screenshot details are exposed in this guide - after the demo was made these settings have all
been deleted! You will see red text throughout the screenshots to indicate pertinent settings. These will all be explained at
the end of these instructions - they will be a handy reference for where these settings are needed when constructing the IGV
configuration file.


## User Pool

### OAuth

Building on techniques already in use in IGV for accessing Google resources - the IGV S3 feature uses OAuth to obtain
credentials that can be used for loading and browsing S3 buckets. Specifically in this example we will use
[AWS Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/) to be both the OAuth endpoint *and* the database of registered users.

**Cognito (and OAuth) allows many other combinations - including enabling social logins (Google, Facebook), or 3rd party OAuth aggregators (Auth0 etc)**. We will not deal with these configuration in this guide however, although UMCCR does use user federation and it is a recommended best practice to manage user credentials and access.

### A source of users

An authenticated login obviously needs some concept of a 'user' (with associated details such as email, name and password).
Within AWS Cognito - this user source is called a User Pool.

We go to our AWS Console / Cognito and 'Create a User Pool'. In our demonstration we call this pool 'IGV User Pool' and
we accept all the default configuration settings - as we will be stepping through changing them after creation.

![user pool created](/img/2019/08/user_pool_created.png)

We then go to 'Users and groups' and create our demonstration user 'igvuser' (with whatever details are appropriate - AWS is
a bit finnicky about the format of the phone number and has a reasonably strict default password policy).

![create user in user pool](/img/2019/08/create_user.png)


### General settings / App clients

OAuth clients (which is what IGV will be behaving as) must be explicitly added into a user
 pool in order to enable logins by users in the pool. Here we go to
'App clients' and create a new client - accepting the default settings and giving it a unique app client name
 of 'igv demo client'.

![application client create](/img/2019/08/app_clients_create.png)

Immediately after creation, an 'App client secret' has been made for us. These settings are needed for
 the IGV configuration so we show this screenshot purely for those purposes. No actual changes need to be made
 to the app client here.

![application client edit](/img/2019/08/app_clients_edit.png)


### App integration / App client settings

Once the app client is created - we need to complete the User Pool by putting some custom settings into the app client related
to how IGV is going to call it. We also need to create a domain that IGV will use for finding the OAuth endpoints.

When we first come into the app client settings - the app client we have just created is effectively disabled. We need to enable the
client ('Select all'), specify the callback URL that is going to be used by IGV (this is a localhost URL that defines
where IGV on your desktop listens for information coming back to it - and must be `http://localhost:60151/oauthCallback` for
a standard IGV desktop setup), and switch on OAuth 2.0.

The final settings for our client are shown below.

![settings app client](/img/2019/08/settings_app_client.png)

### App integration and Cognito domain name

We need to create a domain to define the URLs that IGV will visit to initiate actions. The domain must be globally unique, so come up with
a relevant name for your purposes. Note that unlike most settings we are hilighting in these screenshots - these go into
our config files with some suffixes (i.e they do not copy directly).

![cognito igv domain](/img/2019/08/domain.png)

### Other

There are many other settings for Cognito user pools - dealing with how logins look and feels, password complexity
rules, MFA etc. We will not go into them in these instructions - but these should all be evaluated in any production scenario.

## Identity Pool

We have now set up a user pool - a source of users - but there is no mapping yet between these users and a set of AWS credentials that
will be needed to access the AWS S3 files. To establish this mapping - we need to set up a AWS Cognito Identity Pool.

Before starting - we need two settings from our User Pool - so go to the settings of our previously created
User Pool and write down the following values.

The app client id is a random string created during our User Pool setup. It will look something 
like `3f4ujenfmr77tg12iofbebpkoh` and will be labelled 'App client id'.

The pool id is a shorter random string created when we first made the User Pool. It will look something
like `ap-southeast-2_IYMvlZzmv` and will be labelled 'Pool Id'.

We then create an identity pool, entering in the settings from above and a unique identity pool name.

![identity pool created](/img/2019/08/identity_pool_created.png)

The next page will then allow use to create AWS user roles associated with the Identity Pool. The 'authenticated' 
identity role is the only one of interest to us - and it is fine to accept the defaults. We will add to these
defaults later to give the role the ability to access S3.

Finally for the Identity Pool - we need to find the newly created Identity Pool ID. This is shown in multiple
spots in the AWS Console UI - but can be seen easily when we go to 'Edit Identity Pool'.

![identity pool edited](/img/2019/08/identity_pool_edit.png)


## Roles and policies

The whole point of this exercise is to load a BAM from S3 - so let's make a bucket with a BAM and create the
permissions necessary for us to access it.

The first step we will need to do is to give the IAM role in our account enough permissions to access S3. The
default IAM role as created automatically by Cognito has a very restricted set of rights. Here we have gone
to the role (look for the one called \*Auth\_Role) and added a \*read only\* custom policy that fits our needs:

![auth policy](/img/2019/08/auth_policy.png)

For instance, one could use the following custom policy attached to the authenticated role:

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "IGVCognitoAuthedUsersProd",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:ListBucket",
                "s3:GetObject"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::igv-demo-bucket",
                "arn:aws:s3:::igv-demo-bucket/*",
            ]
        },
        {
            "Sid": "IGVListBuckets",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:ListAllMyBuckets"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::*"
            ]
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "mobileanalytics:PutEvents",
                "cognito-sync:*",
                "cognito-identity:*"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

[Those permissions could be further tightened if there are concerns about other users listing objects that they do not own.](https://github.com/awsdocs/iam-user-guide/issues/107)

**Please make sure that the *Unauth_Role has no policies attached (implicitly denying all actions by unauthenticated users), otherwise those users may access some of your resources on AWS**. The following screenshot shows the expected result:

![unauth policy](/img/2019/08/unauth_policy.png)

The reason for this emphasis is that there have been security incidents with misconfigured Cognito installations:

{{<tweet 1124026439366586368>}}

So it's worth to pay attention to it and be safer than sorry.

## S3

Now all we need is a bucket with a BAM - so find a BAM (and index file) from somewhere and upload them into
a bucket.

![s3 contents](/img/2019/08/s3.png)

Note: there are no special permissions on this bucket - it is a private bucket just in the same account as our
Cognito - thereby showing that private BAM files can be accessed. Obviously the S3 permissions model allows
use much more flexible scenarios, including cross account bucket sharing.

## IGV's oauth-config.json file

Finally we need to bring all these settings together in IGV to allow
it to trigger the authentication process. For this, you should host a file
called ```oauth-config.json.gz``` on a public http server. For convenience, one could just
create a [S3 bucket with CloudFront hosting](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/cloudfront-access-to-amazon-s3/)
the json file contents below, compressed with gzip. Once the file can be accessed publicly, [respecting AWS guidelines for safe public S3 buckets](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/amazon-s3-block-public-access-another-layer-of-protection-for-your-accounts-and-buckets/), please paste that public URL on IGV's `View-\>Preferences-\>Advanced-\>OAuth provisioning URL`, as shown in this screenshot:

![igv provisioning URL](igv-oauth-config-json-provisioning.png)

The config file you are editing contains all the instructions to allow it to connect to Cognito:

```json
{
   "apiKey": "",
   "project_id": "igv",

   "auth_provider": "Amazon",
   "auth_provider_x509_cert_url": "https://www.googleapis.com/oauth2/v1/certs",
   "aws_region": "ap-southeast-2",
   "scope": "email%20openid%20profile",
   "redirect_uris": [
     "http://localhost:60151/oauthCallback"
   ],

   "client_id": "3f4ujenfmr77tg12iofbebpkoh",
   "client_secret": "en1q6638m4dogrr6erhosetim67sjilc6htjnfmf6ljk2q3j9og",
   "authorization_endpoint": "https://igv-demo.auth.ap-southeast-2.amazoncognito.com/login",
   "token_endpoint": "https://igv-demo.auth.ap-southeast-2.amazoncognito.com/token",
   "aws_cognito_fed_pool_id": "ap-southeast-2:15b7bf93-18ca-40d5-99e9-38b4eb69363e",
   "aws_cognito_pool_id": "ap-southeast-2_IYMvlZzmv",
   "aws_cognito_role_arn": "arn:aws:iam::YOUR_AWS_ACCOUNT:role/YOUR_Cognito_igvAuth_Role"
}
```

Of the above settings, some are seemingly arbitrary (unused?) values. This includes
* ```apiKey``` 
* ```project_id```.

Other settings are fixed for the scenario we have (a full Cognito solution in ap-southeast-2). These include
* ```auth_provider```
* ```auth_provider_x509_cert_url```
* ```aws_region``` 
* ```scope``` 
* ```redirect_uris``` (is a fixed value unless
 someone has changed the listening port inside IGV)
 
 All the other settings in the config **must be set to values that are unique to your particular installation (there is no point copying the values directly from the example JSON!)**. These values come directly from various stages in our User Pool and Identity Pool creation. To help
 match where the values come from - you can go back through the above screen shots - and look for red text
 ```(key)``` to show where directly in the AWS Console the values have come from.
 

## IGV is ready to see data from AWS S3

 Once these settings are made - run IGV on your desktop and go to the menus Amazon / Login.
 
 A browser page should open up asking you for the username and password you created earlier. On the first login - it may also prompt you to change your password.
 
 The menu **Amazon->Load From S3 will present a listing of objects that you can load, in case you want to load more than one track at once.**
 
 **Furthermore, File->Session Save and sharing the resulting .xml session file, allows to securely share the context of tracks loaded, including zoom levels and regions of interest to collaborators**.
 
 Alternatively, if you know the path of the file on S3, once logged in, go to File / Load from URL. Enter the S3 path to the BAM you have uploaded as shown below.

![igv load url](/img/2019/08/igv_load.png)
 
If all has gone well you should be able to see the BAM content as if the file was
sitting locally on your computer.

![igv bam loaded](/img/2019/08/igv_loaded.png)
