content/blog/2021-08-30-amazon-igv-frontend.md, before:

# Integrative Genomics Viewer for AWS Cloud

At UMCCR, we use AWS to access the BAM and VCF files. Other ways of accessing data are discouraged for security and practical reasons.

### Use Amazon

1. **If you had previous manually-crafted `oauth-config.json` file(s) under your IGV user directory, please remove it.**
2. If you are on a Mac, install with [Homebrew](http://brew.sh) with `brew cask install igv`. Alternatively, manually download from the official Broad site: https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/download and **download only versions >=2.7.2, older releases will not work**.
3. Use the following OAUTH provisioning URL in your IGV advanced preferences (`View->Preferences->Advanced->"OAuth provisioning URL"`), namely: 

![igv provisioning url](../../static/img/2021/igv_provisioning_url.png)

The URL to copy and paste on the box above is this: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/umccr/infrastructure/master/cdk/apps/igv/config/backend/prod/oauth-config.json.gz

To operate the Amazon features, the easiest way is to use the [UMCCR Data Portal](https://data.umccr.org):

![umccr data portal open with igv](../../static/img/2021/umccr_data_portal_open_igv.png)

Alternatively you can load tracks as described in [this tweet](https://twitter.com/braincode/status/1090446488071630849) from within IGV itself:

![igv load s3 bucket menu](../../static/img/2021/igv_load_s3_bucket.jpeg)
![igv s3 filetree](../../static/img/2021/igv_s3_filetree.jpg)

### Use dev environment (optional)

**NOTE: This feature will only work with IGV desktop versions 2.8.9 and above**

If you are an advanced user that needs to have two concurrent IGV installations running on the same computer, connected to `development` and `production` environments, you can create separate IGV user directories that contain special configuration:

Provision your IGV instance as described above with the following URL:

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/umccr/infrastructure/master/cdk/apps/igv/config/backend/dev/oauth-config.json.gz

#### Known issues/FAQ

**Q**: When I try to install IGV I'm faced with a ["... can't be opened because Apple cannot check it for malicious software"](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787), such as:

![igv gatekeeper error](../../static/img/2021/igv_gatekeeper_error.jpg)

**Q:** I cannot see the Amazon menu on my IGV, what's wrong?

**A:** Please revise the "Provisioning URL" copy and pasted from above (or from a PDF) **very carefully and make sure it does NOT contain spaces**.

**A:** This is a known issue with OSX Catalina, see what the IGV team has to say about it: [https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787)

**Q:** IGV is really sluggish, fails to load data and/or says "Out of memory, stopping read reading" or similar issues.

**A:** Please adjust the default `-Xmx4g` memory setting to `-Xmx8g` or higher, depending on your system's available memory.

**Q:** I am a PeterMac employee and I'm using its network. Will I be able to use IGV with AWS?

**A:** No. The PMCC network apparently blocks IGV requests at an application level, not much we can do about it.

**Q:** When I try to install IGV I'm faced with a ["This app is Damaged" error](https://techstuffer.com/this-app-is-damaged-error-macos-sierra/).

**A:** Third party applications installed by "unkwnown developers" (not signed apps) are probably not allowed try running `sudo spctl --master-disable`, run IGV and then `sudo spctl --master-enable` after it's up and running.

**Q:** On windows, the UMMCR-IGV app suddenly opens a terminal and closes it immediately, nothing happens.

**A:** Most probably the available RAM memory on your computer is too little to allocate Java's heap space. Please locate and edit the `igv.bat` file and modify the parameter `Xmx4g` to, for instance, `Xmx1g` if you happen to only have 2GB of RAM (older computers).

**Q:** When I enter a coordinate on the search box, the progress spinner waits indefinitely, nothing loads, cannot see any reads from the BAM file I loaded.

**A:** IGV is picky with chromosome coordinates, please specify those without commas, but with a big integer instead, i.e: `chr1:100043` instead of `chr1:100,000`. Other than that, there's a know issue about that behaviour: it generally means that the region you are exploring is just `N`'s, this only happens on windows.

**Q:** `ERROR [2019-09-26T11:21:33,975]  [CommandListener.java:140] [Thread-3]  java.net.BindException: Address already in use: NET_Bind`

**A:** Do you have another IGV process/session running in parallel? Close it. Still not working? Reboot your computer.

Commit message:

Add blog header so that the blogpost registers

content/blog/2021-08-30-amazon-igv-frontend.md, after:

---
title: "IGV frontend (desktop client) setup"
author: Roman Valls Guimera 
date: "2021-08-30"
slug: igv-amazon-frontend-setup
layout: post
permalink: https://umccr.org/blog/2021/08/30/igv-amazon-frontend-setup
categories:
 - bioinformatics 
 - infrastructure
tags:
 - bioinformatics
 - igv
summary: "Adding the Amazon provisioning URL to IGV desktop"
---

# Integrative Genomics Viewer for AWS Cloud

This blogpost assumes assumes that you have your AWS infrastrucure already in place, if not, read the [Amazon IGV backend setup](https://umccr.org/blog/igv-amazon-backend-setup/).

At UMCCR, we use AWS to access the BAM and VCF files. Other ways of accessing data are discouraged for security and practical reasons... unless you use IGV.js or other browser-based systems, which are preferred.

### Use Amazon

1. **If you had previous manually-crafted `oauth-config.json` file(s) under your IGV user directory, please remove it.**
2. If you are on a Mac, install with [Homebrew](http://brew.sh) with `brew cask install igv`. Alternatively, manually download from the official Broad site: https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/download and **download only versions >=2.7.2, older releases will not work**.
3. Use the following OAUTH provisioning URL in your IGV advanced preferences (`View->Preferences->Advanced->"OAuth provisioning URL"`), namely: 

![igv provisioning url](../../static/img/2021/igv_provisioning_url.png)

The URL to copy and paste on the box above is this: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/umccr/infrastructure/master/cdk/apps/igv/config/backend/prod/oauth-config.json.gz

To operate the Amazon features, the easiest way is to use the [UMCCR Data Portal](https://data.umccr.org):

![umccr data portal open with igv](../../static/img/2021/umccr_data_portal_open_igv.png)

Alternatively you can load tracks as described in [this tweet](https://twitter.com/braincode/status/1090446488071630849) from within IGV itself:

![igv load s3 bucket menu](../../static/img/2021/igv_load_s3_bucket.jpeg)
![igv s3 filetree](../../static/img/2021/igv_s3_filetree.jpg)

### Use dev environment (optional)

**NOTE: This feature will only work with IGV desktop versions 2.8.9 and above**

If you are an advanced user that needs to have two concurrent IGV installations running on the same computer, connected to `development` and `production` environments, you can create separate IGV user directories that contain special configuration:

Provision your IGV instance as described above with the following URL:

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/umccr/infrastructure/master/cdk/apps/igv/config/backend/dev/oauth-config.json.gz

#### Known issues/FAQ

**Q**: When I try to install IGV I'm faced with a ["... can't be opened because Apple cannot check it for malicious software"](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787), such as:

![igv gatekeeper error](../../static/img/2021/igv_gatekeeper_error.jpg)

**Q:** I cannot see the Amazon menu on my IGV, what's wrong?

**A:** Please revise the "Provisioning URL" copy and pasted from above (or from a PDF) **very carefully and make sure it does NOT contain spaces**.

**A:** This is a known issue with OSX Catalina, see what the IGV team has to say about it: [https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787](https://github.com/igvteam/igv/issues/713#issuecomment-542362787)

**Q:** IGV is really sluggish, fails to load data and/or says "Out of memory, stopping read reading" or similar issues.

**A:** Please adjust the default `-Xmx4g` memory setting to `-Xmx8g` or higher, depending on your system's available memory.

**Q:** I am a PeterMac employee and I'm using its network. Will I be able to use IGV with AWS?

**A:** No. The PMCC network apparently blocks IGV requests at an application level, not much we can do about it.

**Q:** When I try to install IGV I'm faced with a ["This app is Damaged" error](https://techstuffer.com/this-app-is-damaged-error-macos-sierra/).

**A:** Third party applications installed by "unkwnown developers" (not signed apps) are probably not allowed try running `sudo spctl --master-disable`, run IGV and then `sudo spctl --master-enable` after it's up and running.

**Q:** On windows, the UMMCR-IGV app suddenly opens a terminal and closes it immediately, nothing happens.

**A:** Most probably the available RAM memory on your computer is too little to allocate Java's heap space. Please locate and edit the `igv.bat` file and modify the parameter `Xmx4g` to, for instance, `Xmx1g` if you happen to only have 2GB of RAM (older computers).

**Q:** When I enter a coordinate on the search box, the progress spinner waits indefinitely, nothing loads, cannot see any reads from the BAM file I loaded.

**A:** IGV is picky with chromosome coordinates, please specify those without commas, but with a big integer instead, i.e: `chr1:100043` instead of `chr1:100,000`. Other than that, there's a know issue about that behaviour: it generally means that the region you are exploring is just `N`'s, this only happens on windows.

**Q:** `ERROR [2019-09-26T11:21:33,975]  [CommandListener.java:140] [Thread-3]  java.net.BindException: Address already in use: NET_Bind`

**A:** Do you have another IGV process/session running in parallel? Close it. Still not working? Reboot your computer.
